Add InputUnion problem statement (#618)
graphql/graphql-spec: rfcs/InputUnion.md

## Problem Statement

GraphQL currently provides abstract types that operate on **Object** types, but they aren't allowed on **Input** types.

Over the years there have been numerous proposals from the community to add an abstract input type. Without an abstract type, users have had to resort to a handful of work-arounds to model their domains. These work-arounds lead to schemas that aren't as expressive as they could be, and even schemas that model data differently across queries & mutations.

Let's imagine an animal shelter for our example. When querying for a list of the animals, it's easy to see how abstract types are useful - we can get data specific to the type of the animal easily.

```graphql
{
  animalShelter(location: "Portland, OR") {
    animals {
      __typename
      name
      age
      ... on Cat { livesLeft }
      ... on Dog { breed }
      ... on Snake { venom }
    }
  }
}
```

However, when we want to submit data, we can't use an `interface` or `union`, so we must model around that.

> One technique commonly used to is a **Tagged union** pattern. This essentially boils down to a "wrapper" input that isolates each type into it's own field. The field name takes on the convention of representing the type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One technique commonly used to is a **tagged union** pattern. This essentially boils down to a "wrapper" input that isolates each type into it's own field. The field name takes on the convention of representing the type.
```

```graphql
mutation {
  logAnimalDropOff(
    location: "Portland, OR"
    animals: [
      {cat: {name: "Buster", age: 3, livesLeft: 7}}
    ]
  )
}
```

Unfortunately, this opens up a set of problems, since the Tagged union input type actually contains many fields, any of which could be submitted.

```graphql
input AnimalDropOff {
  cat: Cat
  dog: Dog
  snake: Snake
}
```

> This leads to non-sensical mutations that are totally valid, like an animal that is both a `Cat` and a `Dog`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows non-sensical mutations to pass GraphQL validation, for example representing an animal that is both a `Cat` and a `Dog`.
```

```graphql
mutation {
  logAnimalDropOff(
    location: "Portland, OR"
    animals: [
      {
        cat: {name: "Buster", age: 3, livesLeft: 7},
        dog: {name: "Ripple", age: 2, breed: WHIPPET}
      }
    ]
  )
}
```

> In addition, relying on this layer of abstraction means that this domain is modeled differently across input & output. This puts a large burden on the developer interacting with the API, as they have to code against this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, relying on this layer of abstraction means that this domain must be modelled differently across input & output. This can put a larger burden on the developer interacting with the schema, both in terms of lines of code and complexity.
```

```json
// JSON structure returned from a query
{
  "animals": [
    {"__typename": "Cat", "name": "Ruby", "age": 2, "livesLeft": 9}
    {"__typename": "Snake", "name": "Monty", "age": 13, "venom": "POISON"}
  ]
}
```

```json
// JSON structure submitted to a mutation
{
  "animals": [
    {"cat": {"name": "Ruby", "age": 2, "livesLeft": 9}},
    {"snake": {"name": "Monty", "age": 13, "venom": "POISON"}}
  ]
}
```

> Another common approach is to provide a unique mutation for every type. So you'd have a `logCatDropOff` and `logDogDropOff` and `logSnakeDropOff`. That removes the potential for modeling non-sensical situations, but it explodes the number of mutations in an API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another common approach is to provide a unique mutation for every type. A schema employing this technique might have `logCatDropOff`, `logDogDropOff` and `logSnakeDropOff` mutations. This removes the potential for modeling non-sensical situations, but it explodes the number of mutations in a schema, making the schema less accessible.
```

> These workarounds only get worse at scale. Real world APIs can have dozens if not hundreds of possible types.

Reviewer: If you're referring to the schema, I think the numbers are much higher, so have edited accordingly. If you're referring to a single query/mutation field (e.g. the types returned from a union) then please adjust the text to make this clear :+1: 

```suggestion
These workarounds only get worse at scale. Real world GraphQL schemas can have hundreds if not thousands of possible types.
```

Author: clarified this

> The idea of the **Input Union** is to bring an abstract type to inputs. This would enable us to model our domain as elegantly in input as we can in output.

Reviewer: I think the "would [...] as elegantly" claim might be a little strong; IMO none of the proposed solutions live up to this. I've softened it marginally:

```suggestion
The idea of the **Input Union** is to bring an abstract type to inputs. This would enable us to model situations where an input may be of different types in a type-safe and elegant manner, like we can with outputs.
```

```graphql
mutation {
  logAnimalDropOff(
    location: "Portland, OR"
    animals: [
      {name: "Buster", age: 3, livesLeft: 7},
      {name: "Ripple", age: 2, __typename: "Dog"},
    ]
  )
}
```

```graphql
inputunion AnimalDropOff = Dog | Cat | Snake

type Mutation {
  logAnimalDropOff(location: String, animals: [AnimalDropOff]): Boolean
}
```

In this mutation, we encounter the main challenge of the **Input Union** - we need to determine the correct type of the data submitted. In a query, we have the `... on Cat` fragment which explicitly identifies the concrete type of the interface or union.

> A wide variety of solutions have been explored by the community, and they are outlined in detail in this document under [Possible Solutions](#Possible-Solutions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A wide variety of solutions have been explored by the community, and they are outlined in detail in this document under [Possible Solutions](#Possible-Solutions). In the example above we employed a `__typename` field to indicate the type of animal, but this is only one possible solution.
```

```graphql
input AnimalDropOff {
  cat: Cat
  dog: Dog
  snake: Snake
}
```

This allows non-sensical mutations to pass GraphQL validation, for example representing an animal that is both a `Cat` and a `Dog`.

```graphql
mutation {
  logAnimalDropOff(
    location: "Portland, OR"
    animals: [
      {
        cat: {name: "Buster", age: 3, livesLeft: 7},
        dog: {name: "Ripple", age: 2, breed: WHIPPET}
      }
    ]
  )
}
```

In addition, relying on this layer of abstraction means that this domain must be modelled differently across input & output. This can put a larger burden on the developer interacting with the schema, both in terms of lines of code and complexity.

```json
// JSON structure returned from a query
{
  "animals": [
    {"__typename": "Cat", "name": "Ruby", "age": 2, "livesLeft": 9}
    {"__typename": "Snake", "name": "Monty", "age": 13, "venom": "POISON"}
  ]
}
```

```json
// JSON structure submitted to a mutation
{
  "animals": [
    {"cat": {"name": "Ruby", "age": 2, "livesLeft": 9}},
    {"snake": {"name": "Monty", "age": 13, "venom": "POISON"}}
  ]
}
```

> Another common approach is to provide a unique mutation for every type. A schema employing this technique might have `logCatDropOff`, `logDogDropOff` and `logSnakeDropOff` mutations. This removes the potential for modeling non-sensical situations, but it explodes the number of mutations in a schema, making the schema less accessible.

Reviewer 2: Is it worth calling out that the unique mutation per type approach often doesn't work if the input polymorphism is nested in a list or another input object e.g. the [dashboard example](https://gist.github.com/binaryseed/f2dd63d1a1406124be70c17e2e796891#dashboards), the [content widgets example](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/issues/207#issuecomment-308344371), etc.?

Author: yes!

Author: yes

These workarounds only get worse at scale. Real world GraphQL schemas can have dozens if not hundreds of possible types for a single `Interface` or `Union`.

The goal of the **Input Union** is to bring a polymorphic type to Inputs. This would enable us to model situations where an input may be of different types in a type-safe and elegant manner, like we can with outputs.

```graphql
mutation {
  logAnimalDropOff(
    location: "Portland, OR"
    animals: [
      {name: "Buster", age: 3, livesLeft: 7},
      {name: "Ripple", age: 2, __typename: "DogInput"},
    ]
  )
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: Using `__typename`, `__inputname` was one of the most controversial topics in the previous discussions so I don't think it worth having it in `Problem Sketch` section.
It can look like this instead:
--------------------
``` graphql
mutation {
  logAnimalDropOff(
    location: "Portland, OR"
    animals: [
      {name: "Buster", age: 3, livesLeft: 7},
      {name: "Ripple", age: 2},
    ]
  )
}
```
In this mutation, we encounter the main challenge of the **Input Union** - we need to determine the correct type of the data submitted.

A wide variety of solutions have been explored by the community, and they are outlined in detail in this document under [Possible Solutions](#Possible-Solutions).

-----------------------

Reviewer: In my original editing I made this change, but it didn't feel sufficiently clear - I figured someone not familiar with the issue may not have detected the ambiguity. I then added comments to the end of each line `# This is meant to be CatInput` / `# This is meant to be DogInput` but it seemed messy and didn't really fix the issue. In the end I gave up and left it as the `__typename` solution.

However, I agree that if possible this should be addressed.

How about we add a comment `# Problem: the type of this Animal is ambiguous` to the second input?

```graphql
mutation {
  logAnimalDropOff(
    location: "Portland, OR"
    animals: [
      { name: "Buster", age: 3, livesLeft: 7 }
      { name: "Ripple", age: 2 } # Problem: the type of this Animal is ambiguous
    ]
  )
}
```

Reviewer 3: @benjie Agree, comments works.
One note: type of both animals is ambiguous since `livesLeft` can become ambiguous if client extends `Dog` with `livesLeft` field or add new animal type with `livesLeft` in it. We can solve this by introducing some restrictions of having unique fields but it would part of solution and not problem definition.

So I would suggest:
```graphql
mutation {
  logAnimalDropOff(
    location: "Portland, OR",

    # Problem: we need to determinate type of the Animal for every item
    animals: [
      # This is meant to be CatInput
      { name: "Buster", age: 3, livesLeft: 7 }

      # This is meant to be DogInput
      { name: "Ripple", age: 2 }
    ]
  )
}
```

Reviewer: ^ Well written, @IvanGoncharov; I agree.

Reviewer 3: @benjie @binaryseed I reviewed the entire document and everything looks great.
This is the last suggestion I have, so to clarify on final version:

--------------------
``` graphql
mutation {
  logAnimalDropOff(
    location: "Portland, OR",

    # Problem: we need to determinate type of the Animal for every item
    animals: [
      # This is meant to be CatInput
      { name: "Buster", age: 3, livesLeft: 7 },

      # This is meant to be DogInput
      { name: "Ripple", age: 2 },
    ]
  )
}
```
In this mutation, we encounter the main challenge of the **Input Union** - we need to determine the correct type of the data submitted.

A wide variety of solutions have been explored by the community, and they are outlined in detail in this document under [Possible Solutions](#Possible-Solutions).

-----------------------
I think mutation query now is self-explaining so we can skeep SDL part and don't start a conversation on `inputunion` vs `inputUnion` vs `@oneField` vs all other possible SDL syntaxes on this stage of RFC process.

Author: updated, great feedback!
